[MUSIC]
Hi, welcome to this course where we'll try
to improve your statistical inferences.
My name is Daniel Lakens,
I'm an experimental psychologist working
at the Human-Technology Interaction group
at Eindhoven University of Technology.
Now, some years after I completed my Ph.D,
I realized that my understanding of
statistics was actually not good
enough to design a proper study.
I joined the Reproducibility Project
which has the goal to reproduce
100 studies in psychology.
And when I started to perform
the replication study that I would do,
I realized that I had to
calculate an effect size
to perform an a priori power analysis.
Now, this is a very basic first
step when you design a new study,
whether it's a completely new study or
a replication study, it doesn't matter.
I realized I didn't really
know how to do this.
And then I wondered, well,
if I don't know to do this very first,
basic thing,
how can I ever collect informative data?
Since then, I've been looking into how to
improve the way that we design studies and
draw inferences from data.
I published some papers on this, and
I've realized that improving the
statistical understanding of how you do
research really makes you a more
efficient and better researcher.
So I'll share some of the insights I had,
and I'll try to prevent some confusion
that you might have about
statistical tools that we use.
The goal of this is to try to
prevent you from fooling yourself.
As Feynman reminds us, the first principle
in doing science is that you must not fool
yourself- and
you are the easiest person to fool.
So I see a better understanding
of statistics as a very good way
to try to prevent you
from fooling yourself.
Now, as an experimental researcher, the
goal might not be to do statistical tests,
itself.
What you always want to do is
to say something about a theory.
So the goal of data collection is to
first draw statistical inferences and
then to draw theoretical inferences.
That's what you really want to know.
But, of course, you need to draw a good
and valid statistical inferences
because otherwise the next
step doesn't really work.
So let's try to improve this step.
There's a reason why psychologists,
maybe scientists more generally,
are now really interested in
improving statistical inferences.
And one of the first reasons for
starting on this improvement cycle was
a study published by
Daryl Bem on precognition.
Precognition is the idea that
we can predict the future.
Now, you might believed that
this is possible or not, but
as a scientist we should always keep
an open mind and look at the evidence.
In this case, there was a set of nine
published studies that all showed
support for the idea that people
could predict the future.
There were very simple basic tasks that
were performed that are widely used in
experimental psychology, but
the tasks were always reversed.
So instead of first seeing a picture and
then pressing a button to
categorize the picture, the task was
presented in the reversed order.
People first had to press a button, and
only then the picture would emerge.
So, of course,
you don't really know what to press
unless you can predict the future.
And in this set of studies,
people were able to perform above guessing
average in most of these studies.
So after this, maybe some people
thought precognition must be real.
But other people thought, well, if this is
going to be published in one of the top
journals in our field then maybe we
are not drawing the correct statistical
inferences from data because it
seemed unlikely that this was true.
There has been more criticism
in the scientific literature on
how we draw inferences from data.
Now, there are some people who
even go as far as to say that most
published research findings are false.
Is this true?
What do you think?
Do you think that most of the scientific
literature is false or not?
I think the answer is
we don't really know.
We can try to estimate it, but
we don't really have an accurate number.
It's more important, probably, to try to
improve the way that we do research to
prevent this from continuing on, so that
in the future we know that the data that's
generated and the conclusions that
are drawn are most likely to be correct.
There are some problems in
the scientific literature at the moment.
We know that many of the sample
sizes we collect are too small, so
we have underpowered studies.
We know that people are very
flexible in how they analyze data.
So this leads to a lot of flukes,
random findings,
that are actually not true, but
people interpret as a true effect.
And we know that there is
strong publication bias.
People share findings that show an effect,
but
they don't share findings
that do not show an effect.
And all these things
make it very difficult
to conclude whether published
findings are reliable or not.
And the goal in this course is to try to
give you some tools to try this question
better, given that there's publication
bias, flexibility in the data analysis and
low-powered studies.
So, first of all,
we'll try to make sure that you can
draw better statistical inferences.
To achieve this we'll talk about p-values
and how to interpret them, report and
calculate effect sizes and confidence
intervals, but also discuss alternative
ways and frequentist statistics such
as Bayes Factors or likelihoods.
The second goal is to enable you to
design more informative experiments.
To achieve this, we'll talk about how you
can control error rates when you design
studies, how you can efficiently
run high-powered studies.
But we'll also focus a little
bit on theory construction.
Another goal is to evaluate
the evidence in the literature,
given that there is publication bias.
We'll talk about p-curve analysis,
and we'll discuss publication bias and
some ways to identify this in more detail.
Finally, an important goal is to
facilitate cumulative science.
Of course,
we try to improve our knowledge.
How can we do this the best way?
We'll talk about how you can
perform replication studies,
the importance of pre-registration and the
benefits of using pre-registration, and
the importance of adhering to open
science principles in your research.
Accompanying these
lectures are assignments,
and these assignments are really
hands on and in depth knowledge.
The goal is to learn mainly
through simulations.
I'm not a big fan of teaching
through formulas, myself.
If you're interested in that,
you can easily look up the literature and
I'll provide references where
these formulas are discussed.
But in these assignments, we'll mainly
rely on performing simulation studies, and
just seeing what happens in
the long run when you would perform
hundreds of thousands of studies.
Personally, I've found
that really informative
when I tried to understand
statistics myself.
We'll use R, which is free software.
You don't need to have a very good
understanding of how R works.
We'll typically use very simple examples
where you can just run the code,
maybe change one or two numbers.
That's really all you need
to know about how R works.
Now, personally, as I started to get
a better understanding of statistics,
I felt much less uncertain and
much more able to draw correct inferences
from the scientific literature,
and to design studies that would
yield informative results.
I really think that if you want to be a
good researcher, it's important to invest
some time in learning how to draw
better inferences from your data.
And it can be remarkable fun,
getting this better understanding.
If you want to reach out to me,
you can contact me at Twitter with any
questions or comments you might have.
For now, let's get started.
[MUSIC]